# Intro to Dimensionality Reduction

Investigate the possible underlying low-dimensional structure of neural population activity. Neuroscientists use it as a simple data analysis tool to compress data into a lower number of dimensions better suited for further analysis and modeling. We can also use dimensionality reduction to think about and investigate low-dimensional structure in the brain - whether it exists, how it is formed, and so on.

EEG, fMRI are high-dimensional data generators. We need to pull out the most relevant and important aspects of all that mess:) Rationale for dimensionality reduction is because neurons form networks, they are not independent (the brain has fewer degrees of freedom). Video analogy: describe the change of intensity in each of the pixel - it's going to lead to quite inefficient information, better to use a very small number of variables. Great example - video in low-resolution with noise, it's how it looks like from the brain. Temporal smoothing. Can we identify low-dimensional structure from noisy high-dimensional input? Dimensionality reduction as technique for visualization.

Examples where dimensionality reduction is useful: Single-trial analysis of neural population activity (whether all trials of the same task were +- the same?); Hypotheses about population activity structure; Exploratory analysis of large datasets.

PCA has no concept of observation noise; it's appropriate for trial-averaged analysis where we remove noise. Factor analysis (FA) - signle trial (identifies shared variance among the neurons; if neuron varies on its own, FA throws this variance out) but no temporal smoothing. Gaussian process factor analysis (GPFA) - has temporal smoothing and great for single trial. Latent dynamical system (LDS) - use if want to incorporate dynamical rules governing time-evolution of neural activity. Non-linear methods (Isomap, t-SNE, LLE) - use with care. Supervised methods (all considered before - unsupervised; LDA, dPCA), here we provide behavioural | stimulus | time information.
